YEARTIDE
User Documentation

Yeartide is computer software written in 32 bit Microsoft Visual Basic, Version 4.0. This 
program produces yearly tide predictions for the Hood Canal Bridge at ten-minute 
intervals. The output is a text file written to disk. The input is a text file in FORTRAN 
format (one day per record) containing one year of tide predictions for Seattle, 
Washington. The input file may be obtained from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration (NOAA) at the following address:
Tom Kendricks or Tod Ehret
National Ocean Service
Products and Services Branch
1305 East-West Highway
Silver Spring, MD  20910
Voice:	301.713.2877
FAX:	301.713.4436
The name of the output file is derived from the date included on each line of the input 
file. The file name is automatically assigned as YEAR??.TID. NOAA assigns the input 
file name. For the current year, it is Seattle.t97. Specifications for the format of the output 
and input files are described in the attached documentation from HNTB Corporation and 
NOAA.
Although NOAA can provide tide predictions that correct for Daylight Savings Time, the 
input file should be in Standard Time only. The YEARTIDE algorithm assumes that all 
times in the input file are consecutive. Program output is also in Standard Time for this 
reason.
The predictions are approximations based upon the assumption that the tide elevation at 
times between the predicted high and predicted low can be graphed by joining the high 
and low points with a cosine curve segment. Although actual tide behavior will not 
conform precisely to this pattern, the deviation is not significantly greater than the normal 
deviation from the predicted high and low.
The predicted high and low values are calculated by applying correction factors to the 
Seattle predictions. Different correction factors apply to the high tide and the low tide. 
Both the time and elevation are corrected. The correction factors used by YEARTIDE are 
NOAA’s published correction factors for Port Gamble. They are imbedded in the 
program code (declarations section) as constants. They can be adjusted if experience 
indicates that tides at the Hood Canal Bridge are typically earlier or later (higher or 
lower) than Port Gamble. 
Tide
Correction Factor
High Level
Seattle times 0.90 
High Time
Seattle minus 9 minutes
Low Level
Seattle times 0.95
Low Time
Seattle minus 5 minutes
The source code can be accessed from the project file Yeartide.vbp, which loads the code 
module (Main.bas) and a form (frmMain.frm). The compiled program is an executable 
file named Yeartide.exe.
To create the output file, the source file containing the predicted highs and lows for 
Seattle should be in the same subdirectory as the executable program. The output file 
with predictions for Port Gamble will also be created in this subdirecory.
When the program is run, the first screen has text boxes for entering the time and 
elevation of the last tide of the previous year and the first tide of the following year. This 
data is not included in the input file. It is required to calculate predictions at time 
increments between midnight and the first (or last) tide of the year. If this data is not 
entered, the output file will not include predictions before the first tide on January 1 or 
after the last tide on December 31.
The text boxes contain null values, which are in the same format as the input data. They 
must be filled in with data using the same number of characters with the decimal in the 
same position. Include blank spaces before the time or height if the number of characters 
is less than the number of null characters.
When the Run button is clicked, an input box will appear prompting the user for the name 
of the input file. When OK is clicked, the program will process the data and produce the 
output file.
The last line of the output file is a 32 bit checksum in hexadecimal format, which can be 
used to verify file integrity. The predictions themselves should be sampled for accuracy 
by manually calculating the corrections for several high and low tides and comparing the 
result to the output file. Pay closer attention to the first day and the last day of the year. 
The programming routines for these two days are different than the rest of the year and 
therefor should be verified separately. The incremental predictions between the high and 
low should be checked to see that each subsequent value is slightly greater than the 
preceding value for incoming tides and slightly less for outgoing tides. Tides elevations 
ten minutes before and ten minutes after the predicted high or low will typically be the 
same as the predicted high or low. Any abrupt changes between subsequent values 
indicate an error in the program or data.

